README.md, before:

# Milling a PCB with auto-leveling using a Carbide 3D Nomad 3

I tried everything between [Carbide Copper](https://carbide3d.com/copper/), which seems abandoned at best and buggy at worst: it does not seem to spin the spindle. I played with [FlatCAM](http://flatcam.org/) and [bCNC](https://github.com/vlachoudis/bCNC), which I used to brick my Nomad 3. (I provide [instructions to reset the GRBL on a Nomad 3](https://github.com/thomergil/carbide3d-grbl-recovery?tab=readme-ov-file), much thanks to Carbide 3D support.)

![PCB](pcb.png)

Ultimately, I settled on [pcb2gcode](https://github.com/pcb2gcode/pcb2gcode) and [OpenCNCPilot](https://github.com/martin2250/OpenCNCPilot), which supports auto-leveling. Unfortunately–I typically use Mac and Linux–**OpenCNCPilot only works on Windows**. Annoying as that may be, it might be worth the sacrifice, in this case. You can operate your Nomad 3 fully using Windows.

# Video

[![Probing](https://vumbnail.com/1079226042:94c5d7b287.jpg)](https://vimeo.com/1079226042/94c5d7b287)

# Acknowledgements

This has been partly inspired by [Chris Kohlhardt's notes](https://www.chriskohlhardt.com/small-double-sided-pcb-traces-on-nomad-cnc). He does it with FlatCAM and bCNC. I found both rather inscrutable.

# CNC Machine

This has been tested on a [Carbide 3D Nomad 3](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/nomad-3) CNC Mill.

# Mac? Windows? Linux?

Unfortunately, [OpenCNCPilot](https://github.com/martin2250/OpenCNCPilot) exists only for Windows. 🙁  It needs to be attached directly to the CNC Machine. I have not (yet) tried running it using a VM.

# PCB blanks / Copper Clad

I use 2x3" and 4x6" PCB blanks that I order [from Carbide 3D](https://shop.carbide3d.com/collections/materials/products/fr1-copper-clad?variant=41237063046). They come single-sided ("SS") or double-sided ("DS"). They are also sold on Amazon and AliExpress.

# Drill/Mill bits

30º Vee bits:

* [#501 PCB Engraver (30º) bits from Carbide 3D](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/501-engraving-bit?_pos=3&_psq=pcb&_ss=e&_v=1.0) 
* [Coated 30º V-Groove bits from bits&bits](https://bitsbits.com/product/60-degree-v-groove/)
* [FoxAlien 30º bits via Amazon](https://a.co/d/37hDOj5)

60º Vee bits:

* [#502 PCB Engraver (40º) bits from Carbide3D](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/502-engraving-bit?_pos=2&_psq=pcb&_ss=e&_v=1.0)
* [Coated 60º V-Groove bits from bits&bits](https://bitsbits.com/product/425-vg30/)
* [FoxAlien 60º bits via Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08881PKBN?ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_fed_asin_title&th=1)

# Jigs

I provide several different jigs on http://printables.com.

* A jig for drilling and etching a 2x3" copper clad.
* A jig just for drilling a 2x3" copper clad.
* A jig just for drilling a 4x6" copper clad.
* A jig for etching a 2x3" and 4x6" copper clad.

If you don't have access to a 3D printer, contact me, and I can make them for you if time allows. (Large ones are $49.99, and small ones are $39.99 plus shipping.)

# BitZero attachment

You need to rig the [BitZero V2](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/bitzero-v2-for-nomad-3). Anything works as long as it conducts ground between the top of the copper clad and the BitZero. This is my solution: 

![bitzero-rig](bitzero-rig1.png)

The BitZero is squeezed on both sides by two metal rings, held in place by a bolt and screw; an alligator clip attaches to the bolt. The alligator clip connects to a ring terminal that attaches to the copper clad as follows:

![bitzero-rig](bitzero-rig2.png)

# Prepare the Copper Clad

Apply two-sided tape to the copper clad. Fit it into the appropriate part of the jig. Drill 3.5mm holes into the four corners of the copper clad. 

# KiCad PCB Editor

A KiCad tutorial is outside this document's scope, but a few things to keep in mind when exporting from KiCad's PCB editor:

* Make the Edge Cut layer match exactly the dimensions of the PCB blank.
* If you are following this tutorial, there will be screws in the corners, keep your circuitry plenty far away from the corners.
* Ensure a few millimeters of space between the edges and the circuitry.
* Using menu Place → Place Drill/Place File Origin, place the origin at the bottom left of the Edge Cut layer.
* Similarly, using menu Place → Grid Origin, place the origin at the bottom left of the Edge Cut layer.

# KiCad Plot / Export

Using menu File → Plot...:

* :heavy_check_mark: F. Cu
* :heavy_check_mark: B. Cu
* :heavy_check_mark: Edge.Cuts
* :heavy_check_mark: Use drill/place file origin
* :x: Use extended X2 format (meaning, make sure this option is unchecked)

Then:

* Generate Drill Files...
* Excellon format
* Origin: Drill/place file origin
* Units: millimeters
* Zeros: decimal format (recommended)

Then press "Generate".

Back on the Plot window, press "Plot"

# Generate Gcode from .gbr files

Create a file `millproject` in the same directory as the `.gbr` files.

```
metric=true
metricoutput=true
zwork=-0.05          # Depth in mm,
zsafe=20             # Height for movements
zchange=55           # Height for tool changes
mill-feed=100        # Feed rate in mm/minute
mill-speed=12000     # RPM
nom6=1               # Don't issue M6 command
spinup-time=3.0      # Time to spin up the spindle in seconds
spindown-time=3.0    # Time to spin up the spindle in seconds
backtrack=0          # Don't criss-cross copper; always travel at zsafe

# this will mess up offset! don't use!
# zero-start=true
```

Some of these values are **critically important**:

* `zsafe` is the travel height of the mill bit; **if this is too low your bit will crash into the jig or screws, breaking the mill or worse**; I recommend at least 20 (mm), but a higher value is fine. It will be slower but safer.
* `zwork` is how deep the mill drills into the copper substrate; start with `0.025` (for a 60º Vbit) or `0.03` and iterate deeper as needed; this also depends on the Vee bit you are using.
* `nom6=1` prevents `pcb2gcode` from issuing an `M6` command, which trips up the Nomad 3. 

Run [pcb2gcode](https://github.com/pcb2gcode/pcb2gcode):

```bash
# replace "decibel-metel-F_Cu.gbr" with your F_Cu file
# --basename is optional, but without it, the output will be "front.ngc"
pcb2gcode --front decibel-meter-F_Cu.gbr --basename db-LED
```

This creates a `.ngc` file.

# Attach copper clad to jig

Place copper clad into jig, attach with 4 screws. Make sure the ring terminal is **on top** of the copper clad, but under the screw.

Do **not overtighten** the screws. It makes it worse, not better.

# OpenCNCPilot

OpenCNCPilot is a little quirky, but it does everything you need. Please start by reading through the [OpenCNCPilot README](https://github.com/martin2250/OpenCNCPilot/blob/master/README.md).

### General notes on OpenCNCPilot

* As you learn to use OpenCNCPilot, **stay close to your CNC machine with your finger on the power switch**.
* There is not enough vertical space in the user interface to fold open all menus, so you need to manage them. You'll use **File**, and **Edit**, and **Probing**, and **Manual**, and **Manual Probing**. I try to only ever open one at a time and close the ones I don't use.
* You cannot easily reposition the view, but you can zoom in and zoom out and use it to "direct" the view. Under the **Debug** menu (on the right) you can **Lay flat 3D Viewport** and **Restore Viewport**.
* While learning OpenCNCPilot, I destroyed a half-dozen mill bits. I suggest you **start with cheap throwaway bits** while you're learning.
* You can home to (X = 0, Y = 0) without changing height by typing `G0 X0 Y0` in the field under the **Manual** menu and then pressing **Send**. Make sure the bit is at a safe height.
* If the machine seems to get stuck or OpenCNCPilot seems frozen, try the **Soft Reset** button before resetting the machine.

### OpenCNCPilot and Carbide Motion don't play nice

Switching **to** OpenCNCPilot after using Carbide Motion is usually OK. However, using Carbide Motion **after** OpenCNCPilot can fail in mysterious ways, starting with initialization and homing. Stay close and keep your finger on the power button. If weird things happen, follow my [instructions to reset the GRBL on a Nomad 3](https://github.com/thomergil/carbide3d-grbl-recovery?tab=readme-ov-file).

### Start OpenCNCPilot

Using the **Machine** menu on the right, **Connect** to the printer and **Home Machine**.

**If it's not working**: reset the machine, close, and open OpenCNCPilot. Make sure the door magnet is engaged.

### Load the Gcode

Using the **File** menu, load the `.ngc` file generated by `pcb2gcode`. You should see a visualization of your PCB.

### Set the zero point for X and Y (but Z comes later)

In the **Manual** menu, :heavy_check_mark: the **Enable Keyboard Jogging**, and set Feed to 100, click inside the **Jogging Keyboard Focus** and use the left, right, up, down, page up, page down keys to maneuver the mill bit to the bottom left corner of the copper clad. You can increase the **Feed** to 1000 and increase **Max Distance** for larger motions. When you get close, reduce **Feed** to 100, then 10, or even 1.

Make sure you get exactly to the bottom left corner in terms of X and Y, but don't worry about the right Z. You can stay slightly above the surface. Try to get it within 1mm. We will take care of Z later.

Once the mill is positioned correctly, press the **Zero (G92)** button and then **Send** it to the machine.

If you need to re-home or reset the machine, you can verify that X and Y are still correct by sending `G0 X0 Y0` to the machine using the **Manual** menu. Make sure the mill is high enough when you do!

### Raise the bit to a comfortable height

Set **Feed** to 1000 and raise the bit. Center it roughly above the copper clad.

### Ensure Manual Probe offsets are zero

Open the **Manual Probe** menu and set both **Probe Offset** values to 0.

### Prepare Auto-Level probing

Open the **Probe** menu:

* If necessary, press **Clear**.
* Press **Create New**.
* Set Grid Size to 3. (4 is not enough; 2 is probably unnecessary.)
* Set X and Y values such that the red dots surround your PCB. The PCB needs to fit **inside** the red dots. Make sure you **avoid the areas where the screws are**. You will kill your mill bit.
* Press **Apply**.

### Get hardware ready

* Clip the magnet against the collar.
* Clip the alligator clip on the bolt.

### Run Probe

Stay close to the machine.

* Verify that the mill is positioned in the center above the copper clad.
* Press **Run** in the **Probe** menu.

If the machine pauses or freezes, press the **Start** button. There are **TWO** Start buttons! Sometimes, you need to use the one in the **File** menu, and sometimes, you need to use the one at the top of the user interface.

The mill will lower very, very slowly until it touches the surface of the copper clad. It will visit all red points. Don't worry about the order. It will eventually visit all of them.

### Disconnect hardware; leave the ring terminal

Disconnect all but the ring terminal and remove it from the work area. Close the door.

**The ring terminal stays attached!** Don't touch any screws. It will invalidate the height map!

### Apply HeightMap

In the **Edit** menu, press **Apply HeightMap**.

### Start!

Under **File**, press **Start**.

If the machine pauses or freezes, press the **Start** button. There are **TWO** Start buttons! Sometimes, you need to use the one in the **File** menu, and sometimes, you need to use the one at the top of the user interface.

Commit message:

Work in progress with front and back

README.md, after:

# Milling a PCB with auto-leveling using a Carbide 3D Nomad 3

I tried everything between [Carbide Copper](https://carbide3d.com/copper/), which seems abandoned at best and buggy at worst: it does not seem to spin the spindle. I played with [FlatCAM](http://flatcam.org/) and [bCNC](https://github.com/vlachoudis/bCNC), which I used to brick my Nomad 3. (I provide [instructions to reset the GRBL on a Nomad 3](https://github.com/thomergil/carbide3d-grbl-recovery?tab=readme-ov-file), much thanks to Carbide 3D support.)

![PCB](pcb.png)

Ultimately, I settled on [pcb2gcode](https://github.com/pcb2gcode/pcb2gcode) and [OpenCNCPilot](https://github.com/martin2250/OpenCNCPilot), which supports auto-leveling. Unfortunately–I typically use Mac and Linux–**OpenCNCPilot only works on Windows**. Annoying as that may be, it might be worth the sacrifice, in this case. You can operate your Nomad 3 fully using Windows.

# Video (will navigate you away)

[![Probing](https://vumbnail.com/1079226042:94c5d7b287.jpg)](https://vimeo.com/1079226042/94c5d7b287)

# Acknowledgements

This has been partly inspired by [Chris Kohlhardt's notes](https://www.chriskohlhardt.com/small-double-sided-pcb-traces-on-nomad-cnc). He does it with FlatCAM and bCNC. I found both rather inscrutable.

# CNC Machine

This has been tested on a [Carbide 3D Nomad 3](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/nomad-3) CNC Mill.

# Mac? Windows? Linux?

Unfortunately, [OpenCNCPilot](https://github.com/martin2250/OpenCNCPilot) exists only for Windows. 🙁  It needs to be attached directly to the CNC Machine. I have not (yet) tried running it using a VM.

# PCB blanks / Copper Clad

I use 2x3" and 4x6" PCB blanks that I order [from Carbide 3D](https://shop.carbide3d.com/collections/materials/products/fr1-copper-clad?variant=41237063046). They come single-sided ("SS") or double-sided ("DS"). They are also sold on Amazon and AliExpress.

# Drill/Mill bits

30º Vee bits:

* [#501 PCB Engraver (30º) bits from Carbide 3D](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/501-engraving-bit?_pos=3&_psq=pcb&_ss=e&_v=1.0) 
* [Coated 30º V-Groove bits from bits&bits](https://bitsbits.com/product/60-degree-v-groove/)
* [FoxAlien 30º bits via Amazon](https://a.co/d/37hDOj5)

60º Vee bits:

* [#502 PCB Engraver (40º) bits from Carbide3D](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/502-engraving-bit?_pos=2&_psq=pcb&_ss=e&_v=1.0)
* [Coated 60º V-Groove bits from bits&bits](https://bitsbits.com/product/425-vg30/)
* [FoxAlien 60º bits via Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08881PKBN?ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_fed_asin_title&th=1)

# Jigs

I provide several different jigs on http://printables.com.

* A jig for drilling and etching a 2x3" copper clad.
* A jig just for drilling a 2x3" copper clad.
* A jig just for drilling a 4x6" copper clad.
* A jig for etching a 2x3" and 4x6" copper clad.

If you don't have access to a 3D printer, contact me, and I can make them for you if time allows. (Large ones are $49.99, and small ones are $39.99 plus shipping.)

# BitZero attachment

You need to rig the [BitZero V2](https://shop.carbide3d.com/products/bitzero-v2-for-nomad-3). Anything works as long as it conducts ground between the top of the copper clad and the BitZero. This is my solution: 

![bitzero-rig](bitzero-rig1.png)

The BitZero is squeezed on both sides by two metal rings, held in place by a bolt and screw; an alligator clip attaches to the bolt. The alligator clip connects to a ring terminal that attaches to the copper clad as follows:

![bitzero-rig](bitzero-rig2.png)

# Prepare the Copper Clad

Apply two-sided tape to the copper clad. Fit it into the appropriate part of the jig. Drill 3.5mm holes into the four corners of the copper clad. 

# KiCad PCB Editor

A KiCad tutorial is outside this document's scope, but a few things to keep in mind when exporting from KiCad's PCB editor:

* Make the Edge Cut layer match exactly the dimensions of the PCB blank.
* If you are following this tutorial, there will be screws in the corners, keep your circuitry plenty far away from the corners.
* Ensure a few millimeters of space between the edges and the circuitry.
* Using menu Place → Place Drill/Place File Origin, place the origin at the bottom left of the Edge Cut layer.
* Similarly, using menu Place → Grid Origin, place the origin at the bottom left of the Edge Cut layer.

# KiCad Plot / Export

Using menu File → Plot...:

* :heavy_check_mark: F. Cu
* :heavy_check_mark: B. Cu
* :heavy_check_mark: Edge.Cuts
* :heavy_check_mark: Use drill/place file origin
* :x: Use extended X2 format (meaning, make sure this option is unchecked)

Then:

* Generate Drill Files...
* Excellon format
* Origin: Drill/place file origin
* Units: millimeters
* Zeros: decimal format (recommended)

Then press "Generate".

Back on the Plot window, press "Plot"

# Generate Gcode from .gbr files

Create a file `millproject` in the same directory as the `.gbr` files.

```
metric=true
metricoutput=true

zwork=-0.05          # Depth in mm,
zsafe=20             # Height for movements
zchange=55           # Height for tool changes
mill-feed=100        # Feed rate in mm/minute
mill-speed=12000     # RPM
nom6=1               # Don't issue M6 command
spinup-time=3.0      # Time to spin up the spindle in seconds
spindown-time=3.0    # Time to spin up the spindle in seconds
backtrack=0          # Don't criss-cross copper; always travel at zsafe

zdrill=-1.7
drill-feed=60
drill-speed=10000

# this will mess up offset! don't use!
# zero-start=true
```

Some of these values are **critically important**:

* `zsafe` is the travel height of the mill bit; **if this is too low your bit will crash into the jig or screws, breaking the mill or worse**; I recommend at least 20 (mm), but a higher value is fine. It will be slower but safer.
* `zwork` is how deep the mill drills into the copper substrate; start with `0.025` (for a 60º Vbit) or `0.03` and iterate deeper as needed; this also depends on the Vee bit you are using.
* `nom6=1` prevents `pcb2gcode` from issuing an `M6` command, which trips up the Nomad 3. 

Run [pcb2gcode](https://github.com/pcb2gcode/pcb2gcode) to generate the **front**:

```bash
# replace "decibel-metel-F_Cu.gbr" with your F_Cu file
# --basename is optional, but without it, the output will be "front.ngc"
pcb2gcode --front decibel-meter-F_Cu.gbr --basename db-LED
```

Generate the Excelon **drill** file:

```bash
pcb2gcode --drill decibel-meter-PTH.drl --basename db-LED --output-dir ~/save/cnc/
```

Generate the **back** file, assuming you turn it over in the left/right direction and your PCB is centered **exactly through the middle**.

```bash
pcb2gcode --back decibel-meter-B_Cu.gbr --basename db-LED --output-dir ~/save/cnc/ --mirror-axis=0
```

Generate the **back** file, assuming you turn it over in the left/right direction while telling `pcb2code` to flip it around the center axis of a 3" copper clad (i.e, 76.2mm full width, halfway is 38.1mm):

```bash
pcb2gcode --back decibel-meter-B_Cu.gbr --basename db-LED --output-dir ~/save/cnc/ --mirror-axis=38.1
```

This creates a `.ngc` file.

# Attach copper clad to jig

Place copper clad into jig, attach with 4 screws. Make sure the ring terminal is **on top** of the copper clad, but under the screw.

Do **not overtighten** the screws. It makes it worse, not better.

# OpenCNCPilot

OpenCNCPilot is a little quirky, but it does everything you need. Please start by reading through the [OpenCNCPilot README](https://github.com/martin2250/OpenCNCPilot/blob/master/README.md).

### General notes on OpenCNCPilot

* As you learn to use OpenCNCPilot, **stay close to your CNC machine with your finger on the power switch**.
* There is not enough vertical space in the user interface to fold open all menus, so you need to manage them. You'll use **File**, and **Edit**, and **Probing**, and **Manual**, and **Manual Probing**. I try to only ever open one at a time and close the ones I don't use.
* You cannot easily reposition the view, but you can zoom in and zoom out and use it to "direct" the view. Under the **Debug** menu (on the right) you can **Lay flat 3D Viewport** and **Restore Viewport**.
* While learning OpenCNCPilot, I destroyed a half-dozen mill bits. I suggest you **start with cheap throwaway bits** while you're learning.
* You can home to (X = 0, Y = 0) without changing height by typing `G0 X0 Y0` in the field under the **Manual** menu and then pressing **Send**. Make sure the bit is at a safe height.
* If the machine seems to get stuck or OpenCNCPilot seems frozen, try the **Soft Reset** button before resetting the machine.

### OpenCNCPilot and Carbide Motion don't play nice

Switching **to** OpenCNCPilot after using Carbide Motion is usually OK. However, using Carbide Motion **after** OpenCNCPilot can fail in mysterious ways, starting with initialization and homing. Stay close and keep your finger on the power button. If weird things happen, follow my [instructions to reset the GRBL on a Nomad 3](https://github.com/thomergil/carbide3d-grbl-recovery?tab=readme-ov-file).

### Start OpenCNCPilot

Using the **Machine** menu on the right, **Connect** to the printer and **Home Machine**.

**If it's not working**: reset the machine, close, and open OpenCNCPilot. Make sure the door magnet is engaged.

### Load the Gcode

Using the **File** menu, load the `.ngc` file generated by `pcb2gcode`. You should see a visualization of your PCB.

### Set the zero point for X and Y (but Z comes later)

In the **Manual** menu, :heavy_check_mark: the **Enable Keyboard Jogging**, and set Feed to 100, click inside the **Jogging Keyboard Focus** and use the left, right, up, down, page up, page down keys to maneuver the mill bit to the bottom left corner of the copper clad. You can increase the **Feed** to 1000 and increase **Max Distance** for larger motions. When you get close, reduce **Feed** to 100, then 10, or even 1.

Make sure you get exactly to the bottom left corner in terms of X and Y, but don't worry about the right Z. You can stay slightly above the surface. Try to get it within 1mm. We will take care of Z later.

Once the mill is positioned correctly, press the **Zero (G92)** button and then **Send** it to the machine.

If you need to re-home or reset the machine, you can verify that X and Y are still correct by sending `G0 X0 Y0` to the machine using the **Manual** menu. Make sure the mill is high enough when you do!

### Raise the bit to a comfortable height

Set **Feed** to 1000 and raise the bit. Center it roughly above the copper clad.

### Ensure Manual Probe offsets are zero

Open the **Manual Probe** menu and set both **Probe Offset** values to 0.

### Prepare Auto-Level probing

Open the **Probe** menu:

* If necessary, press **Clear**.
* Press **Create New**.
* Set Grid Size to 3. (4 is not enough; 2 is probably unnecessary.)
* Set X and Y values such that the red dots surround your PCB. The PCB needs to fit **inside** the red dots. Make sure you **avoid the areas where the screws are**. You will kill your mill bit.
* Press **Apply**.

### Get hardware ready

* Clip the magnet against the collar.
* Clip the alligator clip on the bolt.

### Run Probe

Stay close to the machine.

* Verify that the mill is positioned in the center above the copper clad.
* Press **Run** in the **Probe** menu.

If the machine pauses or freezes, press the **Start** button. There are **TWO** Start buttons! Sometimes, you need to use the one in the **File** menu, and sometimes, you need to use the one at the top of the user interface.

The mill will lower very, very slowly until it touches the surface of the copper clad. It will visit all red points. Don't worry about the order. It will eventually visit all of them.

### Disconnect hardware; leave the ring terminal

Disconnect all but the ring terminal and remove it from the work area. Close the door.

**The ring terminal stays attached!** Don't touch any screws. It will invalidate the height map!

### Apply HeightMap

In the **Edit** menu, press **Apply HeightMap**.

### Start!

Under **File**, press **Start**.

If the machine pauses or freezes, press the **Start** button. There are **TWO** Start buttons! Sometimes, you need to use the one in the **File** menu, and sometimes, you need to use the one at the top of the user interface.
